---
title: 'Monitoring respiration'
date: '2020-01-02'
---
**Monitoring respiration using Respiratory Induced Plethysmography:**
A wearable device was developed to monitor the respiration rate while sleeping by using Respiratory Induced Plethysmography (RIP) and a wireless body sensor network (BSN) as primary technology with a smart signal processing algorithm to extract the dynamic respiration rate. This device is a textile RIP sensor that can comfortably be worn around the thorax or abdomen. Monitoring respiration rate dynamically plays an important in the diagnosis and treatment of sleep apnea, sudden death syndrome, and other sleep disorders. The dynamic respiration conditions that are monitored are rhythm, breathing mode, and depth during sleeping. A 3D accelerometer is used to detect the body motion. 

The sensor belt contains a flexible wire and has a high resistance to washing processes as shown in the figure. This sensor provides quality signals which are generated due to the shifts in the chest or abdomen. The signals with poor quality were discarded without further processing. The RIP electronics board consists of a DCDC circuit model, a resonance circuit, and a waveform conversion circuit. The respiration efforts in thorax or abdomen could be measured by extracting the dynamic changes of the resultant resonance frequencies. A one-dimension wavelet analysis was utilized and a noise figure was calculated using decomposed signals. A sliding window with a 0.5 second interval was passed over the waveform which tracked the rapid variety of the respiration signal. According to the raw signal spectrum characteristics, the dynamic respiration rates were calculated.

The wearable was tried on 15 subjects who had to wear the device for four hours. 14 out of 15 subjects felt comfortable after wearing the device. The dynamic respiration experiment was conducted upon 10 healthy people (age: 24 + 2 years) in both natural and air-conditioned rooms while the subjects were sleeping on a sheet as shown in Fig. 4. The results are compared with a commercial product called BIOPAC. A relative error of 15% was detected, leaving the experiment to be approximately 83% successful after discarding poor signals. In the future, more advanced signal processing methods can be implemented for the effective use of sensor belts with the biofeedback research method.

**Measuring respiratory phase based on sound and chest movement:**
In this section, a wearable device called HARS (Hybrid-based Aspiration and Respiration Sensing) is introduced. This device, made up of flexible material, is used for respiratory measurement and home-monitoring of asthma. The symptoms of this disease are wheezing, cough, and breathlessness. The device mainly measures respiratory phases by identifying respiratory sound and chest movement. Several wearable sensors have been developed to monitor breath using sound, but these sensors do not discriminate against the respiratory phases: inhalation and exhalation, coughing, swallowing, and yawning.  HARS is small, portable, and comfortable to wear. It is worn on the chest with a gel sheet to acquire both respiratory sound and chest movement to discriminate respiratory phases. Chest movements (expanding with inhalation and shrinking with exhalation) are used as additional inputs as it is difficult and inappropriate to read the respiratory phases just using sound as shown in the figure.

The sensor module consists of a cover (flexible rubber-like material), MEMS microphone (manufactured by SparkFun Co., Ltd.), and a photo reflector (SG2BC, manufactured by KODENSHI Co.). Photo reflectors are placed perpendicular to the wearer’s skin surface. During inhalation, HARS uses the forward movement of the upper chest along with the rising movement of ribs. When the cover part of the device is deformed, the angle of the photo reflector with respect to the skin surface changes, the optical path of the infrared light becomes longer and the intensity of the light becomes weaker. This change in intensity of light is used to measure the chest movement. The value of the photo reflector measurements are increased during inhalation and decreased during exhalation. The system also extracts the respiratory phase using acoustic signals and discriminates them using chest movements. The spectrogram from the waveform is extracted using a short-term Fourier transform, Hamming window of length 1024 with a 50% overlap.

The device experimented on three subjects (male A, B, and C) in their twenties. The results calculated precision, recall, and accuracy for each participant. The average precision, recall, and accuracy were approximately 88%, 89%, and 78%, respectively as shown in the table.