---
title: 'Wearable Health: Early Disease Detection and Management '
date: '2020-01-01'
---
**Introduction:**
Wearable devices to monitor an individual’s health are rapidly becoming a part of one’s life. An increase in health care costs is driving the sector from the conventional one size fits all to a more personalized care system. These wearable and individual-centric systems are not just driving the cost down but also helping with early diagnosis of diseases by monitoring physiological conditions continuously rather than sporadically. This early detection of diseases will in turn help the patients in making more informed decisions and lead a healthier, happier life. This paper reviews recent developments in the area of wearable medical systems for early disease detection and lifestyle management. Enabling technologies for continuous and noninvasive measurements of vital signs, advances in intelligent biomedical clothing and body area networks, approaches for monitoring breathing states, strategies for detecting heart diseases, and investigating the effectiveness of wearable technology to monitor sleep quality are presented in this paper with comparisons of different techniques to detect similar artifacts.

Health care spending by governments and individuals is going up each passing year by approximately 4% but no significant improvement is seen in the overall health of the population. Wearable health monitoring devices have been the center of attention for researchers and the industry in recent times as it has been pointed out by the numerous and annually rising corresponding research and development efforts. 

Due to escalating healthcare costs and the aging population the need to monitor a patient, while he has been out of the hospital, is also increasing each year. In order to address this rise in demand, a variety of system prototypes and commercial products have been launched in recent years which focus on providing feedback about one’s health conditions to either himself or to the primary caretaker or directly to the hospitals and doctors so that they can easily monitor the physical and mental conditions of the person in need and respond to any critical events.

In addition to that this wearable technology is also being used by individuals who want to understand their lifestyle and make changes in order to prevent serious illness. Most recently wearable devices are also being used to maintain social distancing to fight the rapid spread of COVID-19 virus.This literature review mainly focuses on five key areas for monitoring health: - Respiration and breathing states - Cardiovascular diseases and monitoring  - Physical and mental illness  - Sleep disorders - Posture and activity management